Facilitating Stakeholder Engagement (#3137)
alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way: book/website/collaboration/stakeholder-engagement.md

(cl-stakeholder-tools)=

# Facilitating Stakeholder Engagement

When working with stakeholders beyond your own team, there are many tools and best practices for improving the quality of engagement through activities like mapping relevant project stakeholders, organising effective stakeholder workshops, establishing shared language and understanding, and creating the foundation for effective collaboration.

This chapter will share guidance and resources for facilitating different forms of stakeholder engagement for data science collaborations drawing upon expertise from the Turing Research Application Management (RAM) team.

(cl-stakeholder-mapping)=

> ## Stakeholder mapping

Reviewer: I really prefer not to... I don't know if we have a standard for The Turing Way, if we do it's not applied everywhere, but I would argue for non-captialized sub-headings - @Arielle-Bennett are you aware of a standard in TTW?

> ## Stakeholder mapping

Reviewer 2: Standard or no standard I think it reads weird to formalise/deify SM in this way - it's j a tool!

A helpful model to inform this exercise is Simon Sinek's [Golden Circle method](https://www.smartinsights.com/digital-marketing-strategy/online-value-proposition/start-with-why-creating-a-value-proposition-with-the-golden-circle-model/), where the team approaches their work in the following order:
* Why: Why are we doing what we're doing? 
    * This is the ultimate 'North Star' or 'vision' of the project - the fundamental, emotive reason the work is being done
* How: How do we achieve our mission? 
    * This question concerns the broad focus areas, or 'pillars' that setup up the project to achieve the vision
* What: What do we actually do?
    * This question takes the why and the how, and identifies key activities that teams can undertake to achieve their goals

It is important to take these conversations in order, so that strategy alignment can build from the bottom-up.

### Example resources
- [Further RAM Guidance](https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/research-application-management/blob/main/docs/team_strategy.md) on facilitating Why/How/What conversations

### RAM insights

> * Using this basic infrastructure for the conversation helps provide focus and clarity and can lead to a better outcome

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using the basic "Why/How/What" format for the conversation helps provide focus and clarity and can lead to a better outcome.
```

Infrastructure is a bit loaded, also again w/ removing the bullet points

> * By not overstructuring the conversation, you will also allow people the space to express their thoughts freely. We feel this is an important approach as it allows open conversations to happen and things to emerge that otherwise might not

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By not overstructuring the conversation, you will also allow people the space to express their thoughts freely. We feel this is an important approach as it allows open conversations to happen and things to emerge that otherwise might not.
```

> * Strong facilitation skills are crucial, including reading the room and identifying patterns in the conversation. For more on  effective facilitation, check out:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Strong facilitation skills are crucial, including reading the room and identifying patterns in the conversation. 

For more on effective facilitation, check out:
```

    * {ref}`Chairing Events <cl-chairing>`
    * {ref}`Tools for Collaboration <cl-event-tools>`

(cl-stakeholder-user-design)=

> ## User-centric design

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## User-Centric Design
```

### Key question: How can research outputs benefit from a user-centric design process?

> Although many research tools are created for a very narrow purpose, we encourage researchers to consider the user experience (UX) throughout the process and to incorporate UX design principles to make the tool more accesible and usable for all potential users. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Although many research tools are created for a very narrow purpose, we encourage researchers to consider the user experience (UX) throughout the process and to incorporate UX design principles when building to make the tool more accessible and usable for all potential users. 
```

Activities such as user journey mapping and user testing can greatly enhance your understanding of who is using the research tool and how they employ the tool in a real-world scenario.

> By considering potential users of the tool from the early stages of a project, you can include features that will make the tool more accessible to potential stakeholders and therefore more likely to be used and applied in practice. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By considering potential users of the tool from the early stages of a project, you can include features that will make the tool easier to use and more relevant to potential stakeholders, and therefore more likely to be used and applied in practice. 
```

> Existing resources can also benefit greatly from making improvements to the UX by establishing heuristics to define criteria for usability and to identify areas in need of improvement.

Reviewer 3: Link out to a definition of heuristics? V technical term

Reviewer 2: Is heuristics a controversial term? Not sure but just to check!

By utilising exercises and heuristics designed specifically to consider and evaluate the user experience, researchers will examine the assumptions built into the tool and gain a deeper understanding of how it can serve different users types.

> These insights can help a team to develop a roadmap for the tool to plan out future developments with varied stakeholders in mind, leading to more meaningful stakeholder engagements based around a deeper understanding of how those stakeholders are interacting with and repurposing your research output.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These insights can help a team to develop a roadmap for the tool to plan out future developments with varied stakeholders in mind, leading to more meaningful stakeholder engagements based around a deeper understanding of how those stakeholders are interacting with and repurposing a research output.
```

> ### Example resources

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Example Resources
```

- SuperBloom (formerly called Simply Secure) [Knowledge Base](https://simplysecure.org/knowledge-base/)
- User Interface Design Basics at [usability.gov](https://www.usability.gov/what-and-why/user-interface-design.html)
- Diataxis [framework for technical documentation](https://diataxis.fr)
- Read the Docs [documentation hosting](https://readthedocs)
- Nielsen Norman [heuristics](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/ten-usability-heuristics/)

## Stakeholder Impact Assessments
### Key question: How can we develop projects with continual sensitivity to the ways in which these impact stakeholders?

> Stakeholder Impact Assessments (SIAs) are a tool used to gain anticipatory insight into the project impacts, defined as the possible harms and benefits.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Stakeholder Impact Assessments (SIAs) are a tool used to gain anticipatory insight into the projects likely impacts, defined as the possible harms and benefits.
```

SIAs take the form of questionnaires addressing the ethical permissibility, transparency, accountability, and equity of projects.

> We use SIAs to identify and document the full range of potential impacts and provide project teams a contextual awareness of the social environments impacted by their projects. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
SIAs are used to identify and document the full range of potential impacts and provide project teams with a contextual awareness of the social environments impacted by their projects. 
```

> This activity can help teams steer the direction of their projects preventively to ensure that they support the wellbeing and sustainability of the individuals and communities they impact and mitigate any harms. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This activity can help teams steer the direction of their projects proactively to ensure that they support the wellbeing and sustainability of the individuals and communities they impact and mitigate any harms. 
```

Evaluations of project impacts should ideally be done in collaboration with stakeholders. 

> In the context of SIAs, stakeholders are individuals and communities that are impacted or may impact projects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the context of SIAs, stakeholders can be both individuals and communities that are impacted or may impact projects.
```

Engaging stakeholders in conducting SIAs helps secure the accuracy and integrity of SIA outcomes. 
This is because gaps in identity and experience between project teams and impacted individuals may cause there to be differences between how team members view project impacts and how stakeholders experience them. 
Facilitating proportionate stakeholder engagement and input throughout the AI lifecycle is a way to gain a richer understanding of the impacts that projects may have on stakeholders. 
 

> SIAs are not a one-off activity but an iterative one that occurs at a key point throughout the design, development, and deployment stages of the [AI project lifecycle](https://alan-turing-institute.github.io/turing-commons/skills-tracks/rri/rri-101-index/), each time informing the direction of the project so that it continually adapts to changing contexts. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
SIAs are not a one-off activity but an iterative one that occurs at key points throughout the design, development, and deployment stages of the [AI project lifecycle](https://alan-turing-institute.github.io/turing-commons/skills-tracks/rri/rri-101-index/), each time informing the direction of the project so that it continually adapts to changing contexts. 
```

> (cl-stakeholder-tools)=

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(cl-stakeholder-engagement)=
```

# Facilitating Stakeholder Engagement

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Cami testing
```

When working with stakeholders beyond your own team, there are many tools and best practices for improving the quality of engagement through activities like mapping relevant project stakeholders, organising stakeholder workshops, establishing shared language and understanding, and creating the foundation for effective collaboration.

This chapter will share guidance and resources for facilitating different forms of stakeholder engagement for data science collaborations drawing upon expertise from the Turing Research Application Management (RAM) team.

(cl-stakeholder-mapping)=
## Stakeholder mapping

> ### Key question: Who is involved in a collaboration, either as a user, impacted group, or as part of the community of practice?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Key question: Who is involved in a collaboration, either as a user, impacted group, part of the community of practice, or some other capacity?
```

> The goal of stakeholder mapping is to centralise information on the people and organisations involved in a collaboration in one place. 

Reviewer 2: Centralise feels like the wrong word (reads as source of truth, which I really don't like for stakeholder mapping). Not sure on a better word though. Maybe this...
```suggestion
The goal of stakeholder mapping is to understand the people and organisations involved in a collaboration, and collect all this information in one place. 
```

This helps establish a shared understanding of who is involved in what capacity, which is a useful resource for onboarding new teammates and to make sure everyone is on the same page.

> This activity is also often a precursor to other engagement activities such as impact assessment and user experience workshop as stakeholder maps can help identify who should be centered in the research process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This activity is also often a precursor to other engagement activities such as impact assessments, user experience workshops, collaboration cafes and more, as stakeholder maps can help identify who should be centred in the research process.
```

This is motivated by the fact that different teams may have different ways of working and understandings of project outputs like "case study" or "user-friendly website" which can lead to miscommunication or misalignment of expectations.
Once the information is gathered in a single place, you can identify questions and highlights from the interviews to prompt group discussion for alignment.

### Example resources
- Turing RAM team [requirements gathering questionnaire example](https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/research-application-management/blob/main/docs/requirements_gathering.md) for understanding different team approaches to creating case studies.

### RAM insights
* Often times different people will use the same term to mean completely different things or for different purposes
This exercise can help detangle the nuances of commonly used terms and whether or not there is overlap in the collaborators' understandings of it, and thus provides an opportunity to build shared understanding and goals.

> * Requirements gathering is informed by the user interview process from the design and qualitative research worlds

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Requirements gathering is informed by the user interview process from the design and qualitative research worlds

### RAM Insights
A really good measure of success for requirements gathering & alignment is a glossary of terms and concepts that the project team and additional stakeholders have created together, and can refer back to when confusion or misunderstanding arises.
This glossary should be a living and breathing document, that can be updated, and terms redefined, as the team's knowledge and expertise grows.
It is also hard to overstate the importance of having shared language and understanding in a project team - not embedding this at an early stage can allow miscommunication and misinterpretation to snowball into highly incompatible outputs, that don't represent the team, community or userbase!
```

(cl-stakeholder-workshops)=

> ## Organising stakeholder workshops

Reviewer 2: This whole section feels like it needs more meat - got excited by the key question but not much else underneath! @S-Laher is there more you can add?

* Offer opportunities to network and make sure you make every effort to speak to all participants 

(cl-stakeholder-strategy-workshops)=
## Strategy alignment workshops
### Key question: How can we bring different ideas across a group of collaborators into a shared strategy?

A group of collaborators will struggle to work together and progress if its members do not agree on what they are trying to achieve together. 
Strategy alignment goes deeper than agreeing on day to day work - it asks what the team chooses to prioritise, what they value, what motivates them, and ultimately what real-world impact they hope to see from their work.
A helpful model to inform this exercise is Simon Sinek's [Golden Circle method](https://www.smartinsights.com/digital-marketing-strategy/online-value-proposition/start-with-why-creating-a-value-proposition-with-the-golden-circle-model/), where the team approaches their work in the following order:
* Why: Why are we doing what we're doing? 
    * This is the ultimate 'North Star' or 'vision' of the project - the fundamental, emotive reason the work is being done.
* How: How do we achieve our mission? 

>     * This question concerns the broad focus areas, or 'pillars' that setup up the project to achieve the vision.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * This question concerns the broad focus areas, or 'pillars' that setup the project to achieve the vision.
```

* What: What do we actually do?
    * This question takes the why and the how, and identifies key activities that teams can undertake to achieve their goals.

It is important to take these conversations in order, so that strategy alignment can be built from the bottom-up.

### Example resources
- [Further RAM Guidance](https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/research-application-management/blob/main/docs/team_strategy.md) on facilitating Why/How/What conversations

### RAM insights

> Using the basic "Why/How/What" format for the conversation helps provide focus and clarity and can lead to a better outcome.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the basic "Why/How/What" format as a starting point for the conversation helps provide focus and clarity and can lead to a better outcome. As with all frameworks though, this starting point should be adapted into a bespoke framework that matches the understanding and ways of working of the specific project team.
```

By not overstructuring the conversation, you will also allow people the space to express their thoughts freely. We feel this is an important approach as it allows open conversations to happen and things to emerge that otherwise might not.

> Strong facilitation skills are crucial, including reading the room and identifying patterns in the conversation. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Strong facilitation skills are crucial, including reading the room and identifying patterns in the conversation. 
Doing this effectively takes a long time - at least 2 hours per session (so we recommend a minimum of 6 hours, if not longer). These sessions should be separated and standalone (i.e. 2 hours slots on different days), but close enough together to ensure continuity. We recommend scheduling all sessions in advance, to reserve team member's time and ensure small gaps between each session.
A lot of content will be covered in this session. We strongly recommend creating a synthesized output from these sessions that can be referred back to by any project team member. A great example is a comprehensive, professional slide deck, that not only can serve as a resource for the team, but can be used both internally and externally by any team member to communicate the project to stakeholders.
```

These insights can help a team to develop a roadmap for the tool to plan out future developments with varied stakeholders in mind, leading to more meaningful stakeholder engagements based around a deeper understanding of how those stakeholders are interacting with and repurposing a research output.

### Example resources
- SuperBloom (formerly called Simply Secure) [Knowledge Base](https://simplysecure.org/knowledge-base/)
- User Interface Design Basics at [usability.gov](https://www.usability.gov/what-and-why/user-interface-design.html)
- Diataxis [framework for technical documentation](https://diataxis.fr)
- Read the Docs [documentation hosting](https://readthedocs)
- Nielsen Norman [heuristics](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/ten-usability-heuristics/)

### RAM insights
* UX and UI design are specialised skills that researchers are not expected to be familiar with, so consult available resources and bring in a professional team when possible!

> * Look for design firms that focus on coaching and prioritise user accessibility and an open, collaborative process. Working with designers on a fixed project will improve the UX of your tool in the immediate term, but learning these skills as a team will allow you to consider UX and apply design tools at each stage of your project's lifecycle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Look for design firms that focus on coaching and prioritise user accessibility and an open, collaborative process. Working with designers on a fixed project will improve the UX of your tool in the immediate term, but learning these skills as a team will allow you to consider UX and apply design tools at each stage of your project's lifecycle.
* If in doubt/short of time, the simplest exercise you can do in UX design is to find a user, sit down with them whilst they use/play around with your resource, and ask open ended questions about their experience of it. You'll be surprised at how much you can learn from doing this a few times!
```

## Stakeholder Impact Assessments
### Key question: How can we develop projects with continual sensitivity to the ways in which these impact stakeholders?

> Stakeholder Impact Assessments (SIAs) are a tool used to gain anticipatory insight into the project's likely impacts, defined as the possible harms and benefits.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Stakeholder Impact Assessments (SIAs) are a tool used to gain anticipatory insight into the project's likely impacts, defined as the possible [harms] (https://alan-turing-institute.github.io/turing-commons/skills-tracks/aeg/chapter2/harms/#3-bias-injustice-and-discrimination) and benefits.
```

SIAs take the form of questionnaires addressing the ethical permissibility, transparency, accountability, and equity of projects.
SIAs are used to identify and document the full range of potential impacts and provide project teams with a contextual awareness of the social environments impacted by their projects. 

> This activity can help teams steer the direction of their projects proactively to ensure that they support the wellbeing and sustainability of the individuals and communities they impact and mitigate any harms. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This activity can help teams steer the direction of their projects preemptively to ensure that they support the wellbeing and sustainability of the individuals and communities they impact and mitigate any harms. 
```

Evaluations of project impacts should ideally be done in collaboration with stakeholders. 

> In the context of SIAs, stakeholders can be both individuals and communities that are impacted or may impact projects.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the context of SIAs, stakeholders are defined as individuals and communities that are impacted or may impact projects. Stakeholders that are most vulnerable  to potential project harms are considered the most salient.

Engaging stakeholders in conducting SIAs helps secure the accuracy and integrity of SIA outcomes. 
This is because gaps in identity and experience between project teams and impacted individuals may cause there to be differences between how team members view project impacts and how stakeholders experience them. 
Facilitating proportionate stakeholder engagement and input throughout the AI lifecycle is a way to gain a richer understanding of the impacts that projects may have on stakeholders. 

>  

Reviewer 4: Decisions regarding what degree of stakeholder engagement is appropriate for specific AI projects can be informed by conducting a Stakeholder Engagement Process (SEP).

> A SIA is not a one-off activity but an iterative one that occurs at key points throughout the design, development, and deployment stages of the [AI project lifecycle](https://alan-turing-institute.github.io/turing-commons/skills-tracks/rri/rri-101-index/), each time informing the direction of the project so that it continually adapts to changing contexts. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Conducting a SIA is not a one-off activity but an iterative one that occurs at key points throughout the design, development, and deployment stages of the [AI project lifecycle](https://alan-turing-institute.github.io/turing-commons/skills-tracks/rri/rri-101-index/), each time informing the direction of the project so that it continually adapts to changing contexts. 
```

After each iteration is conducted, project teams are asked to re-assess questions addressed within the Stakeholder Engagement Process. 
These questions motivate project teams to iteratively re-assess the extent to which their analysis of project stakeholders and reflection of team positionality continues to be accurate and relevant. 
These re-assessments are used to determine engagement objectives and methods for each following SIA. 

### Example resources

> * Impact-informed guidance for conducting a Stakeholder Engagement Process (SEP) can be found in the [Turing Commons Public Engagement of Data Science course](https://alan-turing-institute.github.io/turing-commons/skills-tracks/ped/chapter3/when/#stakeholder-analysis). The SEP is a complementary process that precedes SIAs and provides reflection questions set to identify and analyse project stakeholders, and reflect on team positionality in relation to project stakeholders. These questions support teams in determining proportional engagement objectives and methods for conducting Stakeholder Impact Assessments. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Impact-informed guidance for conducting a Stakeholder Engagement Process (SEP) can be found in the [Turing Commons AI Ethics and Governance Skills Track](https://alan-turing-institute.github.io/turing-commons/skills-tracks/aeg/chapter3/engagement/). The SEP is a complementary process that precedes SIAs and provides reflection questions set to identify and analyse project stakeholders, and reflect on team positionality in relation to project stakeholders. These questions support teams in determining proportional engagement objectives and methods for conducting Stakeholder Impact Assessments. 
* The Turing Commons AI Ethics and Governance Skills Track also provides [further guidance] (https://alan-turing-institute.github.io/turing-commons/skills-tracks/aeg/chapter3/impact/) on skills for conducting SIAs. 
```

* Requirements gathering is informed by the user interview process from the design and qualitative research worlds
* The work begins after you gather requirements information, which is the starting point to facilitate a group conversation

> ## Running stakeholder workshops

Reviewer 3: Title case

### Key question: What work before, during, and after a workshop should be done to run an effective stakeholder workshop?

Workshops are best suited for engagement activites where there is a need to bring people together to deeply engage on an area of interest with the purpose of working on a task as opposed to gatherings which are purely driven by conversation. 
This ensures participants are taking active steps towards achieving a shared goal.

Organising an effective workshop is a multi stage process which can be segmented into three stages; pre-workshop, workshop execution and post-workshop.
We think it's important to prepare for each stage with equal weight and consideration to ensure the best process for participants throughout.

> ### Example resources

Reviewer 3: Title case

- [RAM Stakeholder Workshop Checklist](https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/research-application-management/blob/main/docs/stakeholder_workshops.md) with key steps and considerations for each stage in the workshop process

> ### RAM insights

Reviewer 3: Title case

> * Be prepared to reign in conversations which labour a point with no apparant solution

Reviewer 3: Same as previously - should remove bullets and just offer paragraph + full stops at the end of sentences
